Apollo 11 Moon Mission

https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/2/27/Apollo_11_insignia.png

Background

Apollo 11 was the spaceflight that first landed humans on the Moon. Commander Neil Armstrong and 
lunar module pilot Buzz Aldrin formed the American crew that landed the Apollo Lunar Module Eagle 
on July 20, 1969, at 20:17 UTC. Armstrong became the first person to step onto the lunar surface 
six hours and 39 minutes later on July 21 at 02:56 UTC; Aldrin joined him 19 minutes later. They 
spent about two and a quarter hours together outside the spacecraft, and they collected 47.5 pounds 
(21.5 kg) of lunar material to bring back to Earth. Command module pilot Michael Collins flew the 
Command Module Columbia alone in lunar orbit while they were on the Moon's surface. Armstrong and 
Aldrin spent 21 hours, 36 minutes on the lunar surface at a site they named Tranquility Base before 
lifting off to rejoin Columbia in lunar orbit.

Apollo 11 was launched by a Saturn V rocket from Kennedy Space Center on Merritt Island, Florida, 
on July 16 at 13:32 UTC, and it was the fifth crewed mission of NASA's Apollo program. The Apollo 
spacecraft had three parts: a command module (CM) with a cabin for the three astronauts, the only 
part that returned to Earth; a service module (SM), which supported the command module with propulsion, 
electrical power, oxygen, and water; and a lunar module (LM) that had two stages—a descent stage for 
landing on the Moon and an ascent stage to place the astronauts back into lunar orbit.

After being sent to the Moon by the Saturn V's third stage, the astronauts separated the spacecraft 
from it and traveled for three days until they entered lunar orbit. Armstrong and Aldrin then moved 
into Eagle and landed in the Sea of Tranquility on July 20. The astronauts used Eagle's ascent stage 
to lift off from the lunar surface and rejoin Collins in the command module. They jettisoned Eagle 
before they performed the maneuvers that propelled Columbia out of the last of its 30 lunar orbits 
onto a trajectory back to Earth. They returned to Earth and splashed down in the Pacific Ocean on 
July 24 after more than eight days in space. 


Personnel

Prime crew

Position                Astronaut
Commander               Neil A. Armstrong
Command Module Pilot    Michael Collins
Lunar Module Pilot      Edward "Buzz" Aldrin, Jr.

Backup crew

Position                Astronaut
Commander               James A. Lovell Jr.
Command Module Pilot    William A. Anders
Lunar Module Pilot      Fred W. Haise Jr.


Site selection

NASA's Apollo Site Selection Board announced five potential landing sites on February 8, 1968. These 
were the result of two years' worth of studies based on high-resolution photography of the lunar 
surface by the five uncrewed probes of the Lunar Orbiter program and information about surface 
conditions provided by the Surveyor program. The best Earth-bound telescopes could not resolve 
features with the resolution Project Apollo required. The landing site had to be close to the 
lunar equator to minimize the amount of propellant required, clear of obstacles to minimize maneuvering, 
and flat to simplify the task of the landing radar. Scientific value was not a consideration.

Areas that appeared promising on photographs taken on Earth were often found to be totally unacceptable. 
The original requirement that the site be free of craters had to be relaxed, as no such site was found. 
Five sites were considered: Sites 1 and 2 were in the Sea of Tranquility (Mare Tranquillitatis); Site 3 
was in the Central Bay (Sinus Medii); and Sites 4 and 5 were in the Ocean of Storms (Oceanus Procellarum). 
The final site selection was based on seven criteria:

1. The site needed to be smooth, with relatively few craters;
2. with approach paths free of large hills, tall cliffs or deep craters that might confuse the landing 
   radar and cause it to issue incorrect readings;
3. reachable with a minimum amount of propellant;
4. allowing for delays in the launch countdown;
5. providing the Apollo spacecraft with a free-return trajectory, one that would allow it to coast around 
   the Moon and safely return to Earth without requiring any engine firings should a problem arise on the 
   way to the Moon;
6. with good visibility during the landing approach, meaning the Sun would be between 7 and 20 degrees 
   behind the LM; and a general slope of less than two degrees in the landing area.

The requirement for the Sun angle was particularly restrictive, limiting the launch date to one day per
month. A landing just after dawn was chosen to limit the temperature extremes the astronauts would 
experience. The Apollo Site Selection Board selected Site 2, with Sites 3 and 5 as backups in the 
event of the launch being delayed. In May 1969, Apollo 10's lunar module flew to within 15 kilometers 
(9.3 mi) of Site 2, and reported it was acceptable.


Lunar Surface Operations

The astronauts planted the Lunar Flag Assembly containing a flag of the United States on the lunar surface, 
in clear view of the TV camera. Aldrin remembered, "Of all the jobs I had to do on the Moon the one I wanted 
to go the smoothest was the flag raising." But the astronauts struggled with the telescoping rod and 
could only jam the pole about 2 inches (5 cm) into the hard lunar surface. Aldrin was afraid it might topple 
in front of TV viewers. But he gave "a crisp West Point salute". Before Aldrin could take a photo of 
Armstrong with the flag, President Richard Nixon spoke to them through a telephone-radio transmission which 
Nixon called "the most historic phone call ever made from the White House." Nixon originally had a long 
speech prepared to read during the phone call, but Frank Borman, who was at the White House as a NASA 
liaison during Apollo 11, convinced Nixon to keep his words brief.

    Nixon: Hello, Neil and Buzz. I'm talking to you by telephone from the Oval Room at the White House. 
           And this certainly has to be the most historic telephone call ever made from the White House. 
           I just can't tell you how proud we all are of what you have done. For every American, this has 
           to be the proudest day of our lives. And for people all over the world, I am sure that they too 
           join with Americans in recognizing what an immense feat this is. Because of what you have done, 
           the heavens have become a part of man's world. And as you talk to us from the Sea of Tranquility, 
           it inspires us to redouble our efforts to bring peace and tranquility to Earth. For one priceless 
           moment in the whole history of man, all the people on this Earth are truly one: one in their pride 
           in what you have done, and one in our prayers that you will return safely to Earth.

    Armstrong: Thank you, Mr. President. It's a great honor and privilege for us to be here, representing not 
           only the United States, but men of peace of all nations, and with interest and a curiosity, and men 
           with a vision for the future. It's an honor for us to be able to participate here today.


https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/98/Aldrin_Apollo_11_original.jpg


Films and documentaries

* Footprints on the Moon, a 1969 documentary film by Bill Gibson and Barry Coe, about the Apollo 11 
  mission
* Moonwalk One, a 1971 documentary film by Theo Kamecke
* Apollo 11: As it Happened, a 1994 six-hour documentary on ABC News' coverage of the event
* Apollo 11, a 2019 documentary film by Todd Douglas Miller with restored footage of the 1969 event
* Chasing the Moon, a July 2019 PBS three-night six-hour documentary, directed by Robert Stone, examined 
  the events leading up to the Apollo 11 mission. An accompanying book of the same name was also released
* 8 Days: To the Moon and Back, a PBS and BBC Studios 2019 documentary film by Anthony Philipson 
  re-enacting major portions of the Apollo 11 mission using mission audio recordings, new studio footage, 
  NASA and news archives, and computer-generated imagery.

Web Links

* NASA Apollo 11  [https://www.nasa.gov/mission_pages/apollo/apollo-11.html]
* Wikipedia Apollo 11 [https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apollo_11]
* Air and Space Museum [https://airandspace.si.edu/explore-and-learn/topics/apollo/apollo-program/landing-missions/apollo11.cfm]